Document type predicate expression (#614)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/syntax/expressions.adoc

[NOTE]
====
Most expressions in Cypher evaluate to `null` if any of their inner expressions are `null`.

> Notable exceptions are the operators `IS NULL` and `IS NOT NULL` and the type predicate expression.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notable exceptions are the operators `IS NULL`, `IS NOT NULL`, and the type predicate expression.
```

1+d|Rows: 1
|===

[[type-predicate-expressions]]
== Type predicate expressions

_This feature was introduced in Neo4j 5.9._

A type predicate expression can be used to verify the type of a variable, literal, property or other Cypher expression.

[source, syntax, role="noheader", indent=0]
----
<expr> IS :: <TYPE>
----

> where `<expr>` is any Cypher expression and `<TYPE>` is one of the following types:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Where `<expr>` is any Cypher expression and `<TYPE>` is one of the following types:
```

* `BOOLEAN`
* `STRING`
* `INTEGER`
* `FLOAT`
* `DATE`
* `LOCAL TIME`
* `ZONED TIME`
* `LOCAL DATETIME`
* `ZONED DATETIME`
* `DURATION`
* `POINT`

For all available Cypher types, see the section on xref::values-and-types/property-structural-constructed.adoc#types-synonyms[types and their synonyms].

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
UNWIND [42, true, 'abc'] AS val
RETURN val, val IS :: INTEGER AS isInteger
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| +val+ | +isInteger+
| +42+ | +true+
| +true+ | +false+
| +'abc'+ | +false+
2+d|Rows: 3
|===

[[type-predicate-expressions-not]]
=== Type predicate expressions with NOT

> It is also possible to verify that a Cypher expression is not of a certain type, using the negated type predicate expression; `IS NOT ::`.

Reviewer 2: Does the double colons have to be included?

```suggestion 
It is also possible to verify that a Cypher expression is not of a certain type, using the negated type predicate expression `IS NOT ::`.
```

Author: Yes, the versions of the syntax is 
x IS :: STRING (preferred)
x IS TYPED STRING
x :: STRING

x IS NOT :: STRING (preferred)
x IS NOT TYPED STRING

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
UNWIND [42, true, 'abc'] AS val
RETURN val, val IS NOT :: STRING AS notString
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| +val+ | +notString+
| +42+ | +true+
| +true+ | +true+
| +'abc'+ | +false+
2+d|Rows: 3
|===

[[type-predicate-expressions-null]]
=== Type predicate expressions for null

> All Cypher types are considered to include the `null` value.

Reviewer 2: My suggestion may be overly simplistic, but "considered to include" is a bit cryptic I think. 

Also, please include a space after a header (applies to below headers as well).  
```suggestion

All Cypher types include the `null` value.
```

Therefore, `IS ::` will return `true` for all expressions evaluating to `null`, regardless of the type.

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
RETURN (toFloat(null)) IS :: BOOLEAN AS isBoolean
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===
| +isBoolean+
| +true+
1+d|Rows: 1
|===

Likewise, `IS NOT ::` will return `false` for all expressions evaluating to `null`, regardless of the type.

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
RETURN (null + 1) IS NOT :: DATE AS isNotDate
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===
| +isNotDate+
| +false+
1+d|Rows: 1
|===

[[type-predicate-expressions-properties]]
=== Type predicate expression for properties
Type predicate expressions can also be used to filter out nodes or relationships with properties of a certain type.

A graph containing the following nodes is used for the example below:

////
[source, cypher, role=test-setup]
----
MATCH (n) DETACH DELETE n;
CREATE (:Person {name: 'Alice', age:14}),
(:Person {name:'Bob', age:'20'}),
(:Person {name:'Charlie', age:21}),
----
////

> image:graph_expression_type_predicate.svg[]

Reviewer 2: I will update this with an image created in Arrows in a later PR.

Author: Thanks, I just copied one of the svg images from earlier on the page and modified it

> .Query
> [source, cypher]
> ----
> MATCH (n:Person)
> WHERE n.age IS :: INTEGER AND n.age > 18
> RETURN n.name AS name, n.age AS age
> ----

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following query finds all `Person` nodes with an `age` property that is an `INTEGER` with a greater value than `18`.

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (n:Person)
WHERE n.age IS :: INTEGER AND n.age > 18
RETURN n.name AS name, n.age AS age
----
```

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| +name+ | +age+

> | +Charlie+ | +21+

Reviewer 2: `+` not required when `m` is used in column defintion. 
```suggestion
| name | age
| Charlie | 21
```

2+d|Rows: 1
|===

[[type-predicate-expressions-number-sizes]]
=== Type predicate expressions for numbers of different sizes
For numerical values passed in as parameters, Cypher does not take the size of the number into account.

> Cypher will therefore regard any exact numerical parameter as an `INTEGER` regardless of its declared size e.g. an `INT16` or an `INT32` passed through from a client programming language will both be treated as an `INTEGER`.

Reviewer 2: Final sentence added as a suggestion following previous review-comments.

```suggestion
Cypher will therefore regard any exact numerical parameter as an `INTEGER` regardless of its declared size.
For example, an `INT16` or an `INT32` passed through from a client programming language will both be treated by Cypher as an `INTEGER`.
Note that any exact numerical parameter used must fit within the range of an `INT 64`. 
```

.Query
[source, cypher, role=test-skip]
----
RETURN $int16param IS :: INTEGER AS isInteger
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===
| +isInteger+
| +true+
1+d|Rows: 1
|===

> For more information on parameters, see xref::syntax/parameters.adoc[].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
More information about parameters can be found xref::syntax/parameters.adoc[here].
```

1+d|Rows: 1
|===

[[type-predicate-expressions]]
== Type predicate expressions

_This feature was introduced in Neo4j 5.9._

A type predicate expression can be used to verify the type of a variable, literal, property or other Cypher expression.

[source, syntax, role="noheader", indent=0]
----
<expr> IS :: <TYPE>
----

Where `<expr>` is any Cypher expression and `<TYPE>` is one of the following types:

* `BOOLEAN`
* `STRING`
* `INTEGER`
* `FLOAT`
* `DATE`
* `LOCAL TIME`
* `ZONED TIME`
* `LOCAL DATETIME`
* `ZONED DATETIME`
* `DURATION`
* `POINT`

Allowed syntax variations of these types are listed xref::values-and-types/property-structural-constructed.adoc#types-synonyms[here].

.Query
[source, cypher]
----

> UNWIND [42, true, 'abc'] AS val

Reviewer: should you also show null? Might be good to mention that it will be true for all types (until we have NOT NULL at least :P)

Reviewer: found it below

RETURN val, val IS :: INTEGER AS isInteger
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| +val+ | +isInteger+
| +42+ | +true+
| +true+ | +false+
| +'abc'+ | +false+
2+d|Rows: 3
|===

[[type-predicate-expressions-not]]
=== Type predicate expressions with NOT

> It is also possible to verify that a Cypher expression does not have a certain type, using `IS NOT ::`.

Reviewer: it feels odd to just have `IS NOT ::`, feels like the type is missing?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is also possible to verify that a Cypher expression does not have a certain type, using the negated type expression; `IS NOT ::`.
```

perhaps ^^

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
UNWIND [42, true, 'abc'] AS val
RETURN val, val IS NOT :: STRING AS notString
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| +val+ | +notString+
| +42+ | +true+
| +true+ | +true+
| +'abc'+ | +false+
2+d|Rows: 3
|===

[[type-predicate-expressions-null]]
=== Type predicate expressions for null
All Cypher types are considered to include the `null` value.
Therefore, `IS ::` will return `true` for all expressions evaluating to `null`, regardless of the type.

.Query
[source, cypher]
----

> RETURN toFloat(null) IS :: BOOLEAN AS isBoolean

Reviewer: I guess the precedence of these 2 examples is that the toFloat and addition is evaluated first, but do we want to clarify that with parentesis?

Author: Maybe... Currently we have no documentation about precedence whatsoever, I have a card on our wall for that

Author: Let me add parentheses without mentioning precedence for now

Reviewer: feels more needed for the addition part so you don't think the type expression applies to the 1 and then gets added to null, the function call at least keeps itself together better

----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===
| +isBoolean+
| +true+
1+d|Rows: 1
|===

Likewise, `IS NOT ::` will return `false` for all expressions evaluating to `null`, regardless of the type.

.Query
[source, cypher]
----

> RETURN null + 1 IS NOT :: DATE AS isNotDate

Reviewer 3: Maybe parenthesis would help here as well

Reviewer: I made one comment for both but agree, it probably helps more here than fr the function call

----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===
| +isNotDate+
| +false+
1+d|Rows: 1
|===

[[type-predicate-expressions-properties]]
=== Type predicate expression for properties
Type predicate expressions can also be used to filter out nodes or relationships with properties of a certain type.

> Assume that we have a graph containing the following nodes:

Reviewer 3: Do we normally use personal pronouns in the docs?

Author: Good catch, I will check how it is written above

////
[source, cypher, role=test-setup]
----
MATCH (n) DETACH DELETE n;
CREATE (:Person {name: 'Alice', age:14}),
(:Person {name:'Bob', age:'20'}),
(:Person {name:'Charlie', age:21}),
----
////

image:graph_expression_type_predicate.svg[]

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (n:Person)
WHERE n.age IS :: INTEGER AND n.age > 18
RETURN n.name AS name, n.age AS age
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| +name+ | +age+
| +Charlie+ | +21+
2+d|Rows: 1
|===

[[type-predicate-expressions-number-sizes]]
=== Type predicate expressions for numbers of different sizes
For numerical values passed in as parameters, Cypher does not take the size of the number into account.

> Cypher will thus regard any integral parameter as an `INTEGER`, regardless of if it is declared as e.g. an INT16 or an INT64 in the client programming language.

Reviewer: is `integral` the correct word here?

Reviewer 3: "any exact numerical parameter" ?

Reviewer 3: Also they need to fit into an INT64 still right?

Author: I guess that is technically true. Not sure how to formulate that the number should be of a valid range to not overflow

> Cypher will thus regard any exact numerical parameter as an `INTEGER`, regardless of if it is declared as e.g. an INT16 or an INT64 in the client programming language.

Reviewer: This part is kinda hard to read: `regardless of if it is declared as e.g.`. It feels like it starts out one way and then halfway though switches to another?

Reviewer 3: Cypher will therefore regard any exact numerical parameter as an `INTEGER` regardless of its declared size e.g. an INT16 or an INT32 passed through from a client programming language will both be treated as an `INTEGER`.

.Query
[source, cypher, role=test-skip]
----
RETURN $int16param IS :: INTEGER AS isInteger
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===
| +isInteger+
| +true+
1+d|Rows: 1
|===

For more information on parameters, see xref::syntax/parameters.adoc[].

[[type-predicate-expressions-variations]]
=== Syntactical variations of type predicate expressions

> Type predicate expressions allows for some alternative syntax:

Reviewer 3: ``` suggestion
Type predicate expressions allow for some alternative syntax:
```
